In the last video we talked about function scope where if we declare a variable with any keyword whether
it's let const or var within a given function it is scoped to that function.
We don't have access to it outside that function.
Now we're going to see a different type of scope which is called block scope and it doesn't necessarily
have to do with functions at least not directly.
But I did mention at the beginning of the section we would cover some function adjacent content.
And if you think back to one of the very first videos in the courts when I introduced Letten concept
and also var I said we would come back later on.
That's right.
Now to discuss one of the main distinctions between letting const compared to var so this is it block
scope.
This is a very very important concept around how variables work in javascript.
So let's start with a simple example.
Here's a conditional if true it's always going to run whatever code is in here.
Let's declare a variable called animal and set it equal to evil.
If I console that log animal outside this block what do you expect.
What will be printed out.
Let's try it.
Nothing.
We get an error.
Animal is not defined.
So what does this tell us.
It tells us that animal is scoped inside this conditional it is scoped to this block of code blocks
in JavaScript are denoted by curly braces.
Keep in mind this is very different than an object literal which is also curly braces.
This is an object.
This up here is a block.
So same thing if we had a while loop.
If we had a for loop or a four of those are all blocks that code rewrite between the curly braces.
So this is not a function but it appears that animal is still scoped to this block.
And if I console but logged animal here of course it should work and it does.
We get ill and then animal is not defined.
So that's how it behaves.
And if I did change this to const and I rerun it we get the exact same output.
We have access to animal in the curly braces inside the conditional.
We do not have access to it out here.
Now if i duplicate this and I change this to instead use far you can probably tell where I'm going with
this.
If I run it.
It works in both cases.
IL is printed here in the book and outside the block.
So this tells us that letting contest have different scoping rules than var back in the day before letting
const we only had var in var is scoped to functions.
What we covered in the last video there is no block scope for var if we declare a variable using var
in any block like a conditional a for loop a while loop it is not scoped to that block we have access
to it outside and that could be problematic.
And that is different than how a lot of programming languages behave which is why letting cons to where
proposed among other reasons.
So they also know there's a distinction between concept and let.
That was one of the reasons they were added in to create constants in javascript but also for scoping
reasons so why would this potentially be problematic what's wrong with having a variable declared in
a block and having access to it afterwards.
There's a bunch of reasons but let me illustrate a simple problem that you used to come up occasionally.
If we have a for loop using the VAR keyword.
So for var i equals zero I less than let's make an array called well we'll just do animals let animals
equal.
And then we'll have grizzly bear.
Let's do Panda Bear and spectacle bear Specter cold bear and then we'll loop over this using a for loop
AI is less than animal scout length AI plus plus we'll console that lug animals and let's also consider
log AI so we get 0 0.
Well I didn't mean to consider like animals less to animals of AI instead of the whole array.
Each time we get zero.
Grizzly bear.
One Panda Bear 2 spectacle bear.
But here's the thing outside this loop.
If I print I it still exists and it's actually set to 3 because of the way a for loop works.
It starts at 0.
That's less than animal stock length.
So we loop and we add one to AI and then it becomes 1 and then 2 and the last index in here is 2.
So when I is 2 we access the last element and then it's incremented to 3.
The loop does not run again but I doesn't cease to exist.
AI is still here.
We have access to it and this could be problematic if you were relying on a variable called AI maybe
1.
You had to find somewhere else like var AI equals 10.
You might think that this I should remain as 10 but if we print AI down here the only AI that we're
getting is 3 from this loop.
So even though I had a different variable declared with var up top and it looks like at least sort of
upon first glance that I exists only in this loop because we used var it does not.
And that means that we have access to it afterwards which can have all sorts of unintended consequences.
It just makes it harder for you to know exactly where I stops.
It's not going to abide by these bounds.
If we use var because it's not block scoped.
Now if I instead come down here and do this with let let's see what happens now.
So the loop still works great.
But now when I consider log I at the bottom it's set to 10.
And that's because this AI that we use led to declare is scoped to this block to the for loop so it
doesn't exist down here.
The only AI that exists is this one here.
I used var but we could also use let and it works.
And if I did not have I declared up here I try to print it out.
We get an error.
There is no I and the same holds true for.
Though you wouldn't use const in a for loop because it's being incremented that would break everything.
So you can see here it will yell at me assignment to constant variable.
The first time it tries to add one everything breaks so I'll undo that change.
We'll go back to let the other thing that you can see right away.
It tells you that these are not scoped the same way that they exist in different scopes.
This I hear and this I hear is the fact that we don't get an error when we run this code normally if
we have two variables in the same scope with a given name declared with left or const let X equals 10
for try and make another X instead of equal to T we get an error says identifier X has already been
declared in this case we're making a variable AI with it and then another AI with it on the very next
line.
They exist in different scopes.
They are not conflicting once again compared to var which is not block scoped this eye is the exact
same eye down here.
So they are in the same scope.
It starts as 10 and then we are re declaring Ei as 0 and you can do that with var in the same scope.
I can say var t equals 1 and then var t equals 5 which I cannot do with letting const I cannot use the
same identifier twice.
So blocks also include things like while loops conditionals as we saw all of those rules apply for letting
const they are scoped to the block.
So now let's just write a function that also includes a block within it called double array which will
double in array that is passed in.
So if we pass in the array of 1 2 3 4 our fine 1 3 5 we should get back to.
And then 6 and then 10 each element is doubled in a new array.
We're not updating the original so I'm going to write a function that is expecting a are some array
to be passed in will assume it's an array and then we'll loop over that array using a for let x of or
let's call it num num of array I'll make a variable in here called double which is equal to Num Times
2 and then up here I'll make a variable which will be an empty array and I will push double in for each
number.
So I'll start with 1.
I'll double it which I do here I have a variable called double.
I will add that into a new empty array which I'll call which we call it.
I'll go with const because we're not going to change the reference.
We'll call this results.
It starts as an empty array and then result drop push
OK.
So what we have here is a function we have const which is scoped to the entire function which is why
at the end I'm able to return results because the result was defined in this function not in a block.
Then we have double which is scoped to this block.
We still have access to result.
So within a block we still have access to variables that were declared outside the block in this function.
So let's run this now.
We'll call double A R on one two and three.
One two three.
We get to four and six.
If I were to try and counsel dot log double and run the same line.
It does not work if I instead used var for double.
It does work because var does not cease to exist after this block.
Meaning the last time through the loop which was on three double is set to three times two which is
six.
We have access to it down here which is why we see six.
So this is just a quick example where we have different scopes going on.
We have constant result which is scope to the entire function because it's not inside of a block.
We have go back to let let.
Double which is scoped to this block from a for of loop.
So down at the bottom we can still return results.
We don't have access to double if we wanted for some reason to have access to double at the end.
We could define it right here.
Let.
Double and we still have access to it here.
Double equals Num Times 2.
If I run this code we still get to 4 6.
I don't know why you would want access to double outside that block.
We're only using it to push a value in inside the loop but we we do have access if you needed it.
I can still access it even with Latin because I declared it in the function scope and then I'm changing
it within block scope but I'm going to undo that and go back to what we had earlier where it only exists
in the block.
OK.
So to sum this all up.
Let constant var are three ways of declaring a variable.
We've seen that there's a big difference between letting const because const cannot be reassigned.
It's a constant variable in both Latin counts cannot be read declared so we can't have what we've already
seen let X equals 1 let X equals 2.
We cannot re declare a new variable.
We can change it at any point but I cannot re declare the same variable with the same name in the same
scope var.
You can do whatever you want with it but the very important difference that we covered here is that
on one side we have var which is not block scoped on the other side.
We have let in concert which are blocks scoped.
So if you declare a variable with letter const in a loop in a conditional in a for loop in a while loop
those variables are scoped only to the confines of that block.
If they're not in a block if they're defined in a function like we have here we can access it within
that function.
It doesn't exist afterwards which is what we saw in the last video.
And the same is true for far.
So VAR was the only option a couple of years ago.
Function scoped now let constant here block scoped.